.nh
.TH swoof 5 "2026" swoof "File Formats"
.SH NAME
connections.yaml, aliases.yaml \- configuration files for swoof

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBswoof\fP(1) reads two optional YAML configuration files. Both live in the
per-user config directory resolved by Go's \fBos.UserConfigDir()\fR:
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/swoof\fR (or \fB$HOME/.config/swoof\fR) on Linux,
\fB$HOME/Library/Application Support/swoof\fR on macOS, and \fB%AppData%\\swoof\fR on
Windows. Their locations can be overridden with the \fB-c\fR and \fB-a\fR flags
respectively.

.SH CONNECTIONS FILE
\fBconnections.yaml\fR maps a short name to the details of a MySQL connection, so
commands can refer to \fBproduction\fR instead of a full DSN. Each entry supports
the following keys:
.TP
\fBuser\fR
MySQL user name.

.TP
\fBpass\fR
MySQL password.

.TP
\fBhost\fR
Host, optionally with a port, e.g. \fBdb.example.com:3307\fR\&.

.TP
\fBschema\fR
Default database (schema) to use.

.TP
\fBparams\fR
A map of extra DSN parameters, passed through to the MySQL driver (for
example \fBmaxAllowedPacket\fR).

.TP
\fBsource_only\fR
If true, the connection may only be used as a \fIsource\fP\&. swoof refuses to use
it as a destination, guarding against accidental writes to, e.g., production.

.TP
\fBdest_only\fR
If true, the connection may only be used as a \fIdestination\fP\&.

.PP
Example:

.EX
production:
  user: root
  pass: super secret password
  host: my-live.db:3307
  schema: cooldb
  source_only: true
localhost:
  user: root
  pass: correct horse battery staple
  host: 127.0.0.1
  schema: cooldb
  dest_only: true
  params:
    maxAllowedPacket: 1048576
.EE

.SH ALIASES FILE
\fBaliases.yaml\fR maps a short name to a list of tables, so a group of tables can
be referred to by one name. An alias entry may reference other aliases, which
are resolved recursively until only table names remain.

.PP
When a table argument is given, swoof first checks whether it matches an alias
key; if not, it is treated as a table name. Alias names must therefore not
collide with real table names.

.PP
Example:

.EX
Products:
  - products
  - productlines
Orders:
  - orders
  - orderdetails
  - customers
  - payments
All:
  - Products
  - Orders
.EE

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBswoof\fP(1)

.PP
MySQL DSN format:

\[la]https://github.com/go\-sql\-driver/mysql#dsn\-data\-source\-name\[ra]
