.nh
.TH swoof 1 "2026" swoof "User Commands"
.SH NAME
swoof \- move MySQL tables between databases using transactional swaps

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBswoof\fR [\fIflags\fP] \fIsource\fP \fIdest\fP [\fItable\fP\&...]

.PP
\fBswoof init\fR [\fB--system\fR|\fB--user\fR] [\fB-y\fR] [\fB--shell\fR \fIlist\fP] [\fB--no-cache\fR]

.PP
\fBswoof completion\fR \fIbash\fP|\fIzsh\fP|\fIfish\fP

.PP
\fBswoof man\fR [\fIsection\fP]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBswoof\fP copies MySQL tables from a source database to one or more
destination databases. Each table is imported into a temporary table and then
atomically swapped into place with \fBRENAME TABLE\fR, so long imports do not take
the destination table offline and a failed import never leaves a half-written
table behind.

.PP
\fIsource\fP is a MySQL DSN (\fBuser:pass@(host)/dbname\fR) or a name defined in your
connections file.

.PP
\fIdest\fP is one or more comma-separated destinations, each of which may be:
.IP \(bu 2
a DSN or a connection name (a live MySQL destination);
.IP \(bu 2
\fBclipboard\fR, which copies the generated SQL to the system clipboard
instead of writing to a database;
.IP \(bu 2
\fBfile:\fR\fIpath\fP, which writes the generated SQL to a file (a local backup).

.PP
Table arguments may be literal table names, glob-style patterns, or aliases
defined in your aliases file.

.PP
The connection and alias file formats are documented in \fBswoof\fP(5).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-a\fR \fIfile\fP
Your aliases file (default \fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/swoof/aliases.yaml\fR).

.TP
\fB-c\fR \fIfile\fP
Your connections file (default \fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/swoof/connections.yaml\fR).

.TP
\fB-all\fR
Grab all tables; specified tables are ignored.

.TP
\fB-diff\fR, \fB-d\fR
List the tables, views, functions, and stored procedures that exist on the
source but are missing from the destination, then exit without making any
changes. Requires exactly one database destination.

.TP
\fB-missing\fR, \fB-m\fR
Select only the objects missing from the destination, like \fB-all\fR but
filtered to what the destination lacks. Applies to tables, and — when the
corresponding \fB-funcs\fR/\fB-views\fR/\fB-procs\fR flags are given — to functions,
views, and procedures. Requires exactly one database destination.

.TP
\fB-n\fR
Drop/create tables and triggers only, without importing data.

.TP
\fB-insert-ignore\fR
Insert into the existing table without overwriting the existing rows.

.TP
\fB-funcs\fR
Import all functions after tables.

.TP
\fB-views\fR
Import all views after tables and functions.

.TP
\fB-procs\fR
Import all stored procedures after tables, functions, and views.

.TP
\fB-t\fR \fIn\fP
Max concurrent tables imported at the same time (default 4). Import
stability may vary wildly between servers as this increases.

.TP
\fB-r\fR \fIn\fP
Max rows buffer size; this many rows are downloaded and kept ready for
importing (default 10000).

.TP
\fB-w\fR \fIclause\fP
Optional WHERE clause used to filter rows from the source table, e.g.
\fB-w "ID > 1000"\fR\&.

.TP
\fB-p\fR \fIprefix\fP
Prefix of the temp table used for initial creation before the swap and drop
(default \fB_swoof_\fR).

.TP
\fB-dry-run\fR
Do not actually execute any queries that have an effect.

.TP
\fB-v\fR
Write all queries to stdout.

.TP
\fB-no-progress\fR
Disable the progress bars.

.TP
\fB-skip-count\fR
Skip the per-table count query, which can be slow for very large tables.

.TP
\fB-refresh-completions\fR
Refresh the cached table lists used for shell completion for every
source-capable named connection, then exit.

.TP
\fB-version\fR
Print the version and exit.

.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB-help\fR
Show help and exit.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fBinit\fR
Install the man pages and shell completions and pre-warm the completion
caches. Installs system-wide when run as root, otherwise offers to use
\fBsudo\fP(8) and falls back to a per-user install. Detects the installed shells
(bash, zsh, fish) and can be limited with \fB--shell\fR\&. \fB--no-cache\fR skips
cache pre-warming; \fB-y\fR assumes yes for prompts.

.TP
\fBcompletion\fR \fIshell\fP
Print the completion script for \fIshell\fP (\fBbash\fR, \fBzsh\fR, or \fBfish\fR) to
standard output.

.TP
\fBman\fR [\fIsection\fP]
Print the troff man page for the given \fIsection\fP (1 or 5; default 1) to
standard output.

.SH EXAMPLES
Copy specific tables from one DSN to another:

.EX
swoof 'user:pass@(prod-host)/shop' 'user:pass@(localhost)/shop' products orders
.EE

.PP
Use named connections from your connections file:

.EX
swoof production localhost products orders
.EE

.PP
Fan out to multiple destinations:

.EX
swoof production localhost,staging products orders
.EE

.PP
Copy every table matching a glob pattern:

.EX
swoof production localhost 'order_*'
.EE

.PP
Only sync recent rows with a WHERE clause:

.EX
swoof -w "Created > '2025-01-01'" production localhost orders
.EE

.PP
Dump a table to a local SQL file instead of a database:

.EX
swoof production file:backup.sql orders
.EE

.PP
Set up completions, man pages, and warm the caches:

.EX
swoof init
.EE

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Success.

.TP
\fB1\fR
An error occurred (bad flags, connection failure, failed import, etc.).

.TP
\fB130\fR
Interrupted (SIGINT / Ctrl-C).

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR, \fBHOME\fR, \fBAppData\fR
Determine where the connections and aliases files are read from, via Go's
\fBos.UserConfigDir()\fR\&.

.TP
\fBXDG_CACHE_HOME\fR, \fBHOME\fR
Determine where the shell-completion table cache is stored, via Go's
\fBos.UserCacheDir()\fR (\fBswoof/tables/\fR beneath it).

.SH FILES
.TP
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/swoof/connections.yaml\fR
Named connection definitions. See \fBswoof\fP(5).

.TP
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/swoof/aliases.yaml\fR
Named sets of tables. See \fBswoof\fP(5).

.TP
\fB$XDG_CACHE_HOME/swoof/tables/\fR\fIconn\fP\fB\&.json\fR
Cached table lists per connection, used for shell completion. Refreshed on
use (1h TTL) and by \fBswoof -refresh-completions\fR\&.

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBswoof\fP(5)

.PP
Project home and full documentation:

\[la]https://github.com/StirlingMarketingGroup/swoof\[ra]

.PP
MySQL DSN format:

\[la]https://github.com/go\-sql\-driver/mysql#dsn\-data\-source\-name\[ra]

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at 
\[la]https://github.com/StirlingMarketingGroup/swoof/issues\[ra]\&.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Stirling Marketing Group.
